---
title: Support for the Clean Power Plan
date: 2017-04-22
slug: support_for_the_clean_power_plan
tags:
- discourse
- climate
---

The serious nature of air pollution did not truly hit me until a family wedding
in Austin, Texas in the late 90's. That year the pollution was so severe that
older family members were warned by their doctors not to attend. As a kid from
the suburbs, I didn't have to deal with the reality of "bad air" that millions
of people in the urban cores breath day in, day out. As a person of faith, I
began to awaken to the manifest injustice of suburban commuters contributing
more than their fair share to pollution, from the tailpipe and the power plant.
What had been a mere academic awareness suddenly turned visceral.

<!-- truncate -->

Cities and states have had a mixed track record, at best, in dealing with air
quality - ultimately it is a matter of national concern. Thankfully Congress and
the federal government have had the wisdom to act. The [Clean Air
Act](https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/summary-clean-air-act) has been an
essential tool to help restore our air. Its success is not complete of course,
but it is has [moved the
needle](https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/cleanairactsuccess.pdf)(PDF) in
reducing air-born mercury, arsenic, lead, nitrous oxide, and other harmful
pollutants.

Today we recognize, through the [consensus](https://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/)
of the vast majority of the world's scientists who study the Earth's climate,
that we must have strong action to combat a whole class of pollutants that are
not being addressed by the existing measures under the Clean Air Act: so-called
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The E.P.A.'s [Clean Power
Plan](http://www.ucsusa.org/our-work/global-warming/reduce-emissions/what-is-the-clean-power-plan#!)
has been developed as a tool that provides the states with the leeway to act
within broad requirements that will significantly reduce the levels of these
man-made pollutants - which are swiftly disrupting our established climate
patterns, resulting in extreme droughts, floods, heat waves, and sea level rise.

This plan is audacious, and undoubtedly there is room for further improvement as
it moves into action. Please allow it to continue moving forward through a
process of deliberate action and refinement. It will lead to cleaner air for
every American, will aid in the transition to a more sustainable industrial base
to our economy, and will spur real job creation.  Congress can help by
supporting continued rural development - for example, funding [high speed
Internet](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/apr/21/tech-industry-coding-kentucky-hillbillies)
connections - in those regions that are sadly being hit hardest by the necessary
transition from coal to cleaner fuels.
