---
title: Will the Earth be Unfit for Human Habitation?
date: 2010-10-28
tags:
- discourse
- nature
---

_Ms. Dudzinski&rsquo;s 9th Grade English class. Grade: 94.
Current observations: I was very into politics (this was shortly
before the &rsquo;92 election), and somewhere I had learned some
demagoguery that would later serve me well in debate class. The
overall point I was trying to make was and is sound, but on
rediscovering this recently, I couldn&rsquo;t help laughing at my
(ignorant) scare-tactic of running out of oxygen. And where did I
get this "con-environmentalist" term? The assignment was clearly
intended as an exercise in persuasive, opinion-based writing.
The lack of citations is irksome to me._

<!-- truncate -->

Sickening and outright disgusting factors are heavily
contributing to the demise of our environment. But there is a major
misconception on that point, and that is that we are killing the
earth. Mother Earth cannot, and will not, be killed by us. Rather,
we are making the earth unfit for human habitation. Contrary to
popular belief, the human being is not master of his (or her)
environment, rather his (or her) environment is master of
humankind. One day the earth could revolt against us, because of
things like the destruction of the rainforests and the hole we are
causing in the ozone layer.

Those opposed to this particular belief, which is the belief of
millions of others worldwide, believe that nature will heal
herself. True, she will heal herself, but only after almost all
humans on earth have been destroyed, and no further damage can be
done. Another thing the &ldquo;con-environmentalists&rdquo; say is
that we need the rainforest land for agriculture, which is true,
and there are many valuable jobs in the lumber industry dealing
therein, and that lumber, particularly the wood from mahogany and
teak trees, goes out worldwide for the making of furniture. These
are all valid statements. About the ozone layer, those
&ldquo;other&rdquo; people sometimes say that we are not causing
it, that we have nothing to do with it, and that it is a cyclical
thing that has happened before. That is possible. but [sic] nothing
else said by the &ldquo;con-environmentalists&rdquo; is believed by
this writer to be true facts.

Fact: in 1990, rainforests worldwide were being felled at the
horrendous and deadly pace of 72,000 acres a day, an area the size
of the state of Ohio! Everyday [sic] that much wood is being cut
down! The deadly effect of this is that, within a matter of years,
as the earth goes, we will be running out of oxygen. No oxygen
means no life. That also means that, without the use of such
weapons as nuclear warheads, we will have actually destroyed all
life on earth. That is how serious the problem could become, if we
let it.

The ozone layer is a layer of the earth&rsquo;s atmosphere,
that, without, we [sic] would be a drastic problem. From the use of
cfc&rsquo;s and other similar agents, a wide hole is being rent
into our ozone layer over Antarctica, and it is meliorating yearly.
The ozone layer is there to block the sun&rsquo;s ultra-violet
light, which is a known carcinogen, and also causes cataracts in
the eyes. Without this precious ozone, we would not be able to go
outside without fear of burning up. This is a grim possibility, and
we would not live long in this condition.

Destruction of the ozone layer and the rainforests are two of
many conditions that will help contribute to the demise of our very
existence. You may ask, &ldquo;What can I do to help my
environment?&rdquo; What you can do is support politicians that are
environment-friendly. Do not support the so-called
&ldquo;environmental President&rdquo;, George Bush, who was late to
the Rio summit and would not sign crucial bills protecting our
environment. Do not use aerosol cans, because they contain the
harmful cfc&rsquo;s that are destroying the ozone layer. Do not
purchase furniture products made of the rainforest trees, teak and
mahogany mainly, and, on a broader environmental scale, purchase
recycled goods and recycle your paper, plastic, glass, oil, etc.
With global cooperation, this earth of ours can, and will, be
saved.
