---
title: 'Op-Ed: Preserve Local Parks Grants'
date: 2013-03-17
slug: op-ed_preserve_local_parks_grants
tags:
- discourse
- nature
---

_Submitted to the Dallas Morning News today...._

Funding for Local Parks Grants needs to join the State Parks program in
receiving strong support in this year's budget. While the State Parks have
received a positive boost through a recommendation of additional funding to
avoid closures, the Local Parks program looks to be in danger for this budget
cycle. That, despite the presence of a dedicated - but under-utilized - funding
source in the "Sporting Goods Tax".

<!-- truncate -->

Moving to Plano as a youth, after a childhood spent outdoors, I found nothing to
entice me outside. I turned inward and focused on my studies; perhaps that was
for the best. But I felt lost. A part of me was missing. It was the Spring Creek
Forest Preserve in Richardson/Garland, a 2001 recipient of a Local Parks Grant,
that taught me that even Dallas can have its wild places. I did not have to be
spiritually lost in the concrete wilderness.

After some time away from DFW, I now live on the south side of Dallas County,
where the many preserves and parks have been critical to maintaining my personal
well-being. My favorite places are Dogwood Canyon Audubon Center at Cedar Hill
and Trinity River Audubon Center in Dallas; Audubon was a 2010 recipient of a
Local Parks Grant for their wonderful Eco-Investigations program for local
elementary and middle school children. A hidden gem in the heart of South Oak
Cliff is the Joppa Preserve; it will soon be linked to many miles of additional
trails and parks through the College Park and Five-Mile Creek project, which is
being made possible with the help of a substantial Local Parks Grant (2009).
Parks and programs such as these serve thousands of children and adults each
year; their continued vitality and even expansion are critical for the health of
individuals, our community, and even our local economy.

While my personal faith plays an important role in helping keep me indifference
to the ills of society, it is these Texas natural spaces that allow me to
breathe and connect with a feeling of the divine; to feel that I am but a small
part of the natural order; to re-discover the wonder of an ant-lion nest or to
admire the fall color in prairie grasses as well as trees. Transcendence comes
easily in the redwoods, but it is also to be found under the shade of a mighty
pecan tree or in studying the chalk layers revealed by our Dallas-area creeks.
We need these places to keep us whole, to keep our minds sharp, our creativity
stimulated, and our anxieties at bay. This is not merely personal anecdote, but
also proven science: humans thrive best in settings that allow proximity to
"nature", however that might be defined. Without these spaces, I could not bear
to remain in Texas - it would not be the land I love, but just another Sprawl.
