---
title: Hastening the Collapse
date: 2013-08-12
slug: hastening_the_collapse
tags:
- discourse
- religion
---

<div class="image">
![pushing a bicyclist over a cliff](/img/pushBikeCliff.jpg)
</div>

At a Bah&aacute;'&iacute; retreat on [Conversations
on the Way:  Kindling Hope in a Time of Despair](http://www.cvent.com/events/friends-and-family-session-iii-conversations-on-the-way/event-summary-3fb948043b9244a8bbd0e1844a883dc6.aspx), the conversation following
a presentation on the environmental crisis turned to the notion of _hastening
the collapse_ of the old world order. There is a thesis out there, amongst some
Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s and in parts of the Christian community, that
environmental destruction is a signpost on the way to a better world; it is seen
as a crucial element of the retributive calamity that ushers in the promised day
of God.

Then it follow, so some say, that we should not try to stem the tide of climate
change, of ecosystem degradation, of the loss of biodiversity. Moreover, why
should we not actively work to bring about that collapse by purposefully over
consuming &mdash; so that the day of reckoning, when we must transcend our baser
natures in order to survive (or achieve the rapture, in another theology), will
arrive that much sooner?

<!-- truncate -->

One of the participants had a particularly beautiful response, something like
this&hellip; If we are teaching a child to ride a bicycle, we know the child is
likely to fall and experience pain. We lovingly instruct the child, instructing
her as best we can. We prepare for a fall &mdash; we have the Band Aid and
ointment and kisses ready to begin the healing. In our eagerness to have this
child experience reality and get back on the bike, why not give an extra hard
push down the hill, thereby insuring the fall?

Because it would, quite simply, be cruel, and a loving parent could never (one
hopes) actively try to cause harm for their child! Likewise, there is nothing
godly about trying to hasten the "end times" through our knowing destruction of
our natural resources, through knowing abandonment of the stewardship entrusted
to us in the Book of Genesis.

For me, it is a matter of justice &mdash; we must manifest justice today, not
just in that future for which we eagerly await. In manifesting justice, we must
be concerned with the well being of those who, _today_ suffer due to pollution,
rising seas, etc., of those who will suffer in the near future while our vaunted
civilization is still unfolding, and of those who will suffer in that future
from the material impoverishment that we are creating today. Otherwise, what
does it mean to "love your neighbor as yourself," as Christ instructs us? Was
that statement somehow limited in scope and I just missed it?

In a letter to the Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s of the world, Shoghi Effendi, who was
leader ("the Guardian") of that Faith from 1921 until 1957, wrote in terms that
will be familiar to many in the Christian world, describing  a "tempest,
unprecedented in its violence, unpredictable in its course, catastrophic in its
immediate effects, unimaginably glorious in its ultimate consequences" that is
"sweeping the face of the earth" [emphasis added]. Further, he quotes
Bah&aacute;'u'll&aacute;h as saying that "The day is approaching when its
[civilization's] flame will devour the cities, when the Tongue of Grandeur will
proclaim: 'The Kingdom is God's, the Almighty, the All-Praised!'," among other
similar "end times" type statements. And yet he found this to be a call to our
higher selves, not our lower selves, writing that even as we should "acknowledge
the necessity" of this "titanic upheaval," we should also "ardently pray for the
mitigation of its severity, intelligently labor to assuage its fury, and
anticipate, with undimmed vision, the consummation of the fears and the hopes it
must necessarily engender."&dagger; For Shoghi Effendi, apparently, there was no
doubt that we must ameliorate the present conditions of the world, and so to
should it be for the Bah&aacute'&iacute;s.

Thankfully that small band of believers are not alone: among other groups and
venues, the [Interfaith Power &amp;
Light](https://www.interfaithpowerandlight.org) "movement" proves that we can
come to this conclusion &mdash; that our worship of God requires amelioration of
deadly climate conditions created by humanity &mdash; from literally all
backgrounds. Rather than hasten the collapse, let us work across all divisions
to "assuage its fury" and hasten the _integration_ of civilizations.

&dagger; Shoghi Effendi, _The Promised Day is Come_, US Bah&aacute;'&iacute;
Publishing Trust, 1980 revised edition, from pages  2, 3, and 4. [https://reference.bahai.org/en/t/se/PDC/pdc-2.html](http://reference.bahai.org/en/t/se/PDC/pdc-2.html)
