---
layout: page
title: Reflecting on a "Power to Choose" Energy Workshop
date: 2013-03-03
basename: reflecting_on_a_power_to_choose_energy_workshop
tags:
- discourse
- climate
---

{: .float-right }
![lightbulb image](/images/lighbulbOn.png)

Lately, I have been in such a mode of _doing_ that _being_ has taken a back
seat. As I try to enter a more contemplative mood, particularly regarding social
action in response to global climate change, I feel so saturated with facts and
obvious conclusions that new inputs are no longer enriching my knowledge or
perceptions, and mere contemplation feels hollow. But reflection on action...
that may yet have some bearing on the course of future action. So, let's look at
today's action: a workshop on choosing a power provider.

<!--more-->

In Texas, deregulation means that we have energy generators, transmitters, and
dozens of providers that sit in between those two and the consumer. There can be
significant differences in cost, customer service, and mixtures of power sources
between hundreds of different plans. As a way of helping move people away from
the companies with the worst power sources (e.g. coal), <a
href="http://www.dallasinterfaith.org">Dallas Interfaith Power &amp; Light</a>
(D-IPL) agreed to partner with the Sierra Club on a workshop about choosing a
power provider. Truthfully, the <a href="http://texas.sierraclub.org/">Lone Star
Sierra Club</a> did all of the work and D-IPL made a limited (due to our newness
and availability) effort to get the word out.

Meeting at the Dallas Central Library, we looked at <a
href="http://www.powertochoose.org/">http://www.powertochoose.org/</a>,
exploring the tools it provides for learning about power providers. The
intention was to reach out to people who are more likely to be concerned about
cost than about "green energy" - but, the two actually go hand-in-hand (it is
claimed): the most expensive retail provider is the biggest provider in North
Texas and has the dirtiest coal plants [I have verified that the cost is very
high and that one of the nation's most polluting coal plants is owned by the
parent company of that provider]. However, we only had a small group of people
who are supporters of D-IPL and/or the Sierra Club. While it was incredibly
useful working with them, from an expectations stand-point one might consider it
a failure. This despite on-the-ground outreach efforts by the Sierra Club
staffer, who visited with people in lower income neighborhoods and some
churches.

We knew going into it that this would be an experiment, and before packing up we
took the time for some reflection. Everyone who heard about the workshop seemed
genuinely interested, but few came: if we wish to turn this event into a
process, then we must learn to take the workshop to them. Go to local community
centers, libraries, and churches. Furthermore, the presentation will be turned
into a set of YouTube videos and/or webinars to allow dissemination to anyone
who may be interested.

Helping people explore such a trivial-seeming, but in truth very important,
decision is actually quite easy for anyone who is comfortable with a computer
and with a small degree of studying the numbers. Perhaps our next step should be
to train the trainers, and then ask these volunteers to identify a location,
begin developing a relationship with the "management" there (e.g. librarians,
deacons, administrators), and schedule a workshop for local residents to explore
their energy options together.
