---
title: Transcendent Moments
date: 2014-11-23
tags:
- living
- nature
---

Nature-lovers often speak about transcendent moments, occasions where some
experience moved them to a profound awareness of life, the universe, and
everything in it. For some, these are timeless minutes, forever memorable,
forever inspiring. All of the senses align in memory, and perhaps a bit of
wisdom descends in epiphany.

My transcendent moments are not so strong; perhaps that is from a weak sense of
smell. Or perhaps because I seek out a low level extraordinary at every turn:
the senses are not so overwhelmed in these daily moments, as the ordinary passes
beyond rationality. These peek experiences do exist however, and as I sift
through the shoebox of memory, two stand out at very different scales.

<div class="image">
![Colorado river in Arizona](/img/arizonaNasa.jpg)

Page, Arizona, along the Colorado River. [Courtesy
of Nasa](https://www.dvidshub.net/image/855668/page-arizona-image-day#.VHEMwMkXJx1).
</div>

<!-- truncate -->

In 1998, I flew from Austin, Texas to San Francisco, California, to attend the
third global summit for the creation of a United Religions.  Although I had
flown out west before, this time there was something different and unutterably
magical as I gazed out that small, pressurized portal at 30,000 feet.

Somewhere beyond the pines and mountains of New Mexico, the
ancient-yet-still-developing landscape unfolds in a spectrum of subtle
variations between brown, orange, and red. Punctuated by green places. And the
Colorado River. Textures undreamt lay far below and shifted with the slightest
movement.

And then came the mountains, the still snow-capped Sierra Nevadas. These were
the impossibly tall palisades of story and legend: the very reflection of
Tolkien's Ered Nimrais, as I imagined them. These were the peaks and shadowy
passes of the Donner Party.

We flew over this all, yet behind us this landscape remained unconquered. Yes, a
mighty dam. Yes, inappropriate fairways enabled by that dam. They were blips,
minor marks barely worth noticing on our vast Earth Mother.

<div class="image">
![baby owls](/img/barred-owl-chicks4-069.jpg)

Copyright Â© 2011, [Karen
Gallagher](https://morningjoy.wordpress.com/2011/02/23/owl-babies/). Used by
permission under the Creative Commons  [Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0
Unported](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) license.
</div>

The second scene occurred in 2010 in a well-wooded park above the Mississippi
River in St. Paul, Minnesota. We were out performing points counts of the
land-bird population for a certain someone's PhD work. Once or twice before we
had glimpses or heard a Barred Owl. On this occasion, we had something truly
wonderful - one of us managed to spot two baby Barred Owls, barely fledged, with
those giant owl feet. Much like the two above, except on a bare pine bough.

Time could not hold us in the usual way, as we stood there enraptured by these
wide-eyed balls of fluff and feather. Rather than the transcendence of the vast
reaches, this was quite the opposite. It was a moment of fuller awareness of
Being. Of Life. While the canyons and mountains presented ancient, slow, beauty,
these owls were the here and now. The fast, young, fresh. Vital, worldly, and
visceral.

Here, before me, was life renewed &mdash; in a form that stirred that mysterious
animal response of nurture, that human non-rational-yet-deeply-intrinsic feeling
of unbearable cuteness,  for lack of a better or manly term. The Unbearable
Cuteness of Being.

---

Although so vastly different in scale, these were two moments that turned the
everyday into the divine cathedral. Each created a sacred space in uniting time
and place in four dimensions, so briefly, so sharply, yet so impossible to
remember perfectly. These are the moments to seek out again and again - but no,
not to seek out, for neither were sought, as such. These are the moments of
humble wakefulness that must simply be recognized as they occur.
