---
title: On Religious Leadership, and the GreenFaith Fellowship
date: 2014-06-15
slug: on_religious_leadership_and_the_greenfaith_fellowship
tags:
- discourse
- religion
- nature
---

_An essay submitted as part of my application to the [GreenFaith Fellowship
Program](http://www.greenfaith.org/programs/fellowship)_. Hopefully I put my best foot forward ;-).

There are no clergy in the Bah&aacute;'&iacute;­ Faith. There is no seminary,
and none can seek a position of leadership based on education, attainment, or
station. Its governance is egalitarian and progressively inclusive. And yet it
is inaccurate to say there are no leaders.

<!-- truncate -->

There are always those who stand out &mdash; for a day, a year, or a lifetime.
These  leaders emerge from the community based on the service they render. For
those with the capacity to serve, there is no room for choosing to become a
leader: either you live into your God-given potential, or you hold yourself back
artificially.

{: .center-block}
\***

{: .float-right }
![photo of tree with pink flowers](/img/IMG_1689.JPG){: .border .rounded }<br>
<small>Cassia grandis, Crooked Tree<br>Wildlife Sanctuary, Belize</small>

I did not grow up in the Bah&aacute;'&iacute;­ Faith, having adopted it as a
teenager in 1994. Though there were local role models in those early years, my
first significant exposure to religious role models came through participation
in the United Religions Initiative (URI), beginning in 1997. These were a
diverse mixture of traditional clerical leaders and spiritual activists,
exploring the idea that the religions needed an international forum for
advancing the cause of peace. The passion, care, love, humility, appreciation,
and most of all dedicated service to humanity was and continues to be an
inspiration to me.

My attendance was made possible by a deliberate outreach: the organizers,
seeking to bring many voices and perspectives into the URI Charter-building
process, realized that bright-eyed, idealistic youth were needed. A call for
participants went out, a call that found a student of physics and philosophy,
one who was utterly without a clue about organizational development but who was
nonetheless eager to engage in dialogue with his elders. A key lesson from this
experience was the need for intentional diversity and inclusiveness.

From 1997 to 2008 I was engaged with global and regional URI bodies as a
participant, volunteer, and eventually part-time staff.  By 2008, I realized
that my effectiveness was hampered by lack of community-based experience.
Combined with increasing service opportunities within my own Faith, it was time
for a change. I stepped back from the URI in order to go local.

{: .center-block}
\***

In my childhood, concern for the environment came before concern about
spirituality. In college I strayed into the abstract and slowly came back to
earth. I dropped philosophy, and particle physics led me into programming. For
many years, I knew that recycling and minimizing my personal impact were not
enough. Ecology, spirituality, and the peace-centered activism of the URI needed
to be stitched together in some fashion. But I struggled to uncover a path.

In the 00's, my wife and I moved from Texas to Minnesota so that she could study
Conservation Biology. Many conversations during those years touched on
human-centered ecology: not because humans are more deserving than polar bears,
but because leaving people out of the conservation calculus costs the movement
grassroots support and effectiveness. After returning to Texas, I decided to
find a way to incorporate this understanding into spiritual activism.

In April 2012, I joined an "Earth Day interfaith dialogue." The follow-up
meeting found me volunteering to help sustain the momentum. Eventually, we
became the Dallas chapter of Interfaith Power &amp; Light, "promot[ing] love,
justice, and care for creation through local action, education, and dialogue
about climate stewardship." Two GreenFaith Fellows were instrumental in getting
us started: Genny Rowley, at the time a doctoral student who became my Co-Chair,
and Yaira Robinson, Associate Director of the Texas Interfaith Center for Public
Policy. Among other things, they have shown me that anthropocentric ecology must
be rooted not just in science, but also in active concern for the needs of the
disadvantaged.

Coming full circle on those earlier interfaith experiences, I see that our local
efforts need to be more consciously inclusive. It does not suffice to "do good
for others" if those "others" are not at the table to help shape that "good." As
a servant-leader, it is my hope that the GreenFaith Fellowship will strengthen
my ability to engage in dialogue and action with people from diverse religious
and social backgrounds.

{: .center-block}
![pelican photo](/img/IMG_2069.JPG){: .border .rounded .img-fluid }<br>
<small>Brown Pelican, precariously perched, on a small caye off the coast of Belize (Hopkins area)</small>

{: .center-block}
\***

The folks in the URI were, for me, the first public face of true service. Within
my own community I began to notice the private side of service. One man's quite
determination to provide a simple but delicious meal of rice and beans, during a
retreat hosted by his wife, was particularly moving. Service, I realized, can
come from anyone at anytime, and it is equally important whether guiding a
discussion or attending to the comfort of the attendees.

Those quite acts were my inspirations as I began actively participating in the
life of the community, whether cleaning up after a service or consulting on
community affairs. Eventually the call for institutional service caught up with
me, and I have been elected to serve on Bah&aacute;'&iacute;­ Local Spiritual
Assemblies for the past nine years. These institutions address the
administrative and pastoral needs of the community, acting as "loving shepherds"
and working to become the "trusted ones of the Merciful among men." The members
are skilled, but not professional, administrators. Their time is limited, their
formal constituencies are small but highly diverse, and their priorities have
been rightly focused on nurturing the development of united, caring,
outward-oriented spiritual communities.

The Universal House of Justice, which is the head of the Bah&aacute;'&iacute;­
Faith, has made clear that environmental degradation and climate change are
worsening threats to the prosperity and well-being of humanity. Translating
understanding into action at the local level has been a slow process. Yet the
authoritative call for action is clear, and the worldwide urgency apparent:
humanity must re-orient itself with respect to consumption, justice, and
treatment of natural resources.

The desire to build capacity for service within my faith community, whether
acting in an administrative capacity, giving a talk on climate change, or
helping to "green" Bah&aacute;'&iacute;­ facilities, is a second motivator for
my application to the GreenFaith Fellowship.
