---
layout: page
title: Birdsong and Rustling Leaves
date: 2014-12-22
basename: birdsong_and_rustling_leaves
tags:
- living
- birds
- nature
---

Birds were not my friends as a child. For some reason birdsong in my backyard
was an annoyance. I knew how to distinguish a handful of birds from one another,
but they simply held no fascination. Reptiles were much more interesting. In
hindsight, I think it was the call of the Northern Cardinal &mdash; possibly
awakening me in the early hours &mdash; that caused my mild disdain. So how did
I arrive at this point where birding brings me such joy?

{: .center-block }
![photo of birds](/images/WhiteRockPelicans.JPG){: .img-fluid .border .rounded }<br>
<small><i>American White Pelicans, Double Crested Cormorants, and domestic goose. White Rock Lake, Dallas, TX. January 2014.</i></small>

<!-- truncate -->

When I moved from a small city to a big one in middle school, the soundscape
changed: Northern Mockingbirds dominated the scene, and their song was
interesting. But the raucous, urban-adapted, Blue Jay and Great-Tailed Grackle
were the first birds to draw my attention to the magnificent diversity of
sounds, colors, and habits.

That move left a trauma that was undiagnosed for many years. It was the
beginning of a benign estrangement from nature, which continued through college
years. Sure, there were a few "nature experiences" in those years, including
that slowly-growing awareness of avian diversity. But they were few and far
between, and generally did not qualify as what I would, at that time, call
Nature. Too much time in the physics lab, mechanically studying the unseeable,
deepened the rift.

After graduation, that separation began to ease as I took the time to hike
around the Central Texas Hill Country. To this day, I feel most alive and at
home in such a landscape: rocky, hilly, with mixed oak and juniper trees and the
occasional patch of meadow. Both childhood and early adult life were spent in
such environs, and it always delights me to smell that combination of needle and
leaf.

Seeing my first endangered species in its native habitat &mdash; the Golden
Cheeked Warbler &mdash; was a particular highlight of those excursions. In fact,
it was bird watching that finally healed the estrangement. Seeing a Barred Owl
bathe in a creek, and studying the iridescence of a Cedar Waxwing, helped me
appreciate the joy of living and the meaning of beauty in diversity. Baby owls
and seasonal changes (phenology) reminded me of the dynamic cycles of life, far
more viscerally than _The Lion King_ ever did.

Though my heart sometimes longs for those hills, I have learned to turn any view
of nature into a prayer of refreshment and praise. Even in an urban park, one
can enjoy the dance of Mockingbirds, the sound of wind through the trees, and
the indomitable spirit of wildflowers claiming their neglected corner. "One can
only live while one is intoxicated with life," wrote Tolstoy in his famous
Confession. Birdsong and rustling leaves: these are the most potent of spiritual
wines.

{: .center-block }
![photo of egrets](/images/WhiteRockEgrets.JPG)<br>
<small><i>Great Egrets, American Coots, and a Mallard. White Rock Lake, Dallas, TX. January 2014.</i></small>
