---
title: Cold Fusion and Alternative Energy
date: 2004-09-16
tags:
- tech
---

Though historically I've not read many blogs, I've been poking around looking
for good news sources to add to my news feeds in the new [Mozilla Firefox
pr1](https://www.mozilla.org/). My slumming has turned an interesting piece on
the [future of cold
fusion](https://www.popularmechanics.com/science/energy/a6848/is-fusion-power-finally-for-real/)
over at Popular Science.

<!-- truncate -->

First I must give credit where credit is due: I found this article thanks to the
a run down of new alternative energy articles (New Energy Currents:
2004-09-15 (removed dead link; SF 2025)) at `windsofchange.net`.

The University of Texas at Austin is one of the foremost plasma / fusion
research centers in the world. I can well remember my modern physics professor
(himself a plasma experimentalist) bashing the concept of cold fusion research,
and I'm sure he would have seen it as a complete waste of time and money. While
I can't say that I was particularly keen to learn more about cold fusion, the
reactions struck me as pure dogma. Thus my curiousity has been piqued for the
past year or more as I have heard rumors of renewed interested, and perhaps even
credibility, for cold fusion research.

Brief aside: cold fusion is the process of fusing two atoms into one, thereby
releasing energy, without the introduction of a large external energy source.
Thus if successful on a large scale, cold fusion would generate large amounts of
electricity without requiring that much be put in. Conversely, "hot fusion,"
requiring sun-like temperatures, has thus far been unable to systematically
produce more energy than was required to heat up the atoms in the first place,
making it un-tenable as an energy source unless and until some major
breakthrough comes along.

The sad thing about this article is that it is in Popular Science. As the
authors point out, and as I have noticed, it is impossible to get cold fusion
research documented in the normal scientific journals. The topic is anathema to
most physicists, and they won't have it sharing space with "serious" research.
But despite the ridicule, the De Soto's of physics have continued looking for
their fountain of youth. And if this
simple graph (image no longer available; SF 2025) is any indicator, they may have found it. Problem is, they
still don't know exactly how to use it or how it works.

After describing the state of cold fusion research and renewed interest from the
Department of Energy (possibly for creation of tritium, which is required for
hydrogen bomb upkeep), the article goes on to point out a frightening
possibility: table top cold fusion could be the worst thing to happen to
civilization, if terrorists ever figured out how to use it. You see, the
hydrogen bombs they would be able to make are 1,000 times stronger than a simple
atom bomb.
