---
title: Call for Greater Oversight of Governmental Science Policy
date: 2004-12-08
tags:
- discourse
- nature
---

Home-brew letter to Senators Dayton and Coleman and Representative McCollum
bemoaning the executive branch's handling of science-related policy and
suggesting greater Congressional oversight for protection of consumer and
environmental rights. If you too are concerned with federal scientific policy
making, then please feel free to copy the letter below (and modify as desired)
and send to your [senators](https://www.senate.gov) and [representative](https://www.house.gov).

<!-- truncate -->

---

I am writing to urge you to protect consumer and environmental rights, as they
have been mandated by Congress, by enforcing greater oversight over Federal
agencies that systematically dismiss sound scientific data in favor of
industry-preferential results.

From the FDA to the EPA, the Interior service, and other agencies, unqualified
bureaucrats have been systematically overruling sound scientific conclusions to
the benefit of corporate interests. The latest situation, reported by the New
York Times on 12/05/2004, pits policymaker Julie MacDonald (Fish and Wildlife
service) against federal biologists in establishing the need for protection of
the sage grouse. While regulatory agencies are well served by robust internal
dialogue, the use of ungrounded criticism of objective science is hurting
citizens and consumers and undermining Congressional mandates.

The recent Vioxx situation has brought much-needed attention to the failings of
a Federal agency (the FDA) in its capacity of regulating industry for the
protection of the people. Consistent reports have shown that federal agencies
have relied too heavily on the industries they are charged with regulating and
have twisted science from relying on fact-based observation and experimentation
to wild speculation and unsubstantiated opinion. Widely overlooked reports in
the nation's leading media have documented these transgressions. Perhaps the
most comprehensive, the Duke Environmental Law and Policy Forum spring edition
clearly documents numerous occasions where industry-related politics have
trumped rigid scientific assessment of policy options. Of additional concern are
the "litmus tests" being applied to potential scientific advisors, an
unprecedented move which seems to require that their personal politics be in
line with the administration's.

The United States is not being well served by political appointees overseeing
scientific endeavors, a situation that seems rectifiable only through
Congressional oversight. Please help spur Federal agencies to restore their
reliance on objective science without industry- and/or politically-related
moderation and censure of data.

Sincerely, \
Stephen A. Fuqua

References:

* [Interior Official and Federal Biologists Clash on Danger to
  Bird](https://www.nytimes.com/2004/12/05/national/05bird) (NY Times)
* [Natural Resources Policy in the Bush (II) Adminsitration: An Outsider's
  Somewhat Jaundiced
  Assessment](https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?httpsredir=1&article=1118&context=delpf)
  (PDF) (Duke Env. Law and Policy Forum)
* [Policy-makers Should Enhance Selection Process For Presidential S&T
  Appointments](https://www.eurekalert.org/news-releases/860255) (National
  Academy of Science)
