---
layout: page
title: Russia Supports Kyoto - Maybe
date: 2004-09-30
basename: russia_supports_kyoto_protocol
tags:
- discourse
- climate
---

It was declared today that Russian President Vladimir Putin has at last
expressed his approvalof the Kyoto Protocol on Global Climage Change. If he can
get this through the Duma for ratification, then the Protocol will become
international law despite the US's lack of ratification. But what is really
going on? And how will it effect the U.S.?

<!--more-->

In <a href="http://www.climate.org/topics/intaction/russfog.shtml">Russian
Ratification of Kyoto Lost in the Fog</a>, published on the 29th, Putin is
quoted as having said "The Russian Government is meticulously examining this
question and is studying all the difficult problems associated with it." That is
hardly a strong or urgent endorsement of  the Treaty.

Nevertheless, the <a
href="http://www.nytimes.com/2004/10/01/international/europe/01russia.html?hp">New
York Times</a> reports that the Russian Cabinet has approved the Treaty and
formally submitted it to the Duma for consideration. Knowing Putin's power in
Russia, it would seem that the way forward is clear, and the Treaty will be
ratified. Once ratified, it will officially go into effect 90 days later.

But I'm not so sure that the Times has interpreted the signals correctly. Both
the Times and the <a
href="http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3152424.stm">BBC report</a> that
Putin's top economic adviser as recently as today has said that it shouldn't be
ratified, and just yesterday (Wed) said that it would not be ratified. Perhaps
Putin is playing a game with us?

In fact, the Times does hint at this possibility, saying that several American
anti-Kyoto industrialists believe it is a ruse by Putin, who will allow the
treaty to fail in the Duma to show that he doesn't them completely in his palm.

Adding more confusion to it all, Russia's Prime Minister earlier in the month
declared, "We consider that ratification will take place in the very nearest
future." But who's ever heard of Mikhail Kasyanov? I can recall a time when the
Prime Minister of Russia seemed to be a meaningful job, but that was back when
Clinton and Gingrich were arguing over American support for the Protocol.

In the end, those of us who support the Treaty's provisions (and see lack of
American support as disgraceful and cowardly) can only hope that the Cabinet's
approval is a positive sign and that the Duma will shortly ratify it.

One thing I would like to know is: would ratification have any effect on the
U.S.? As a non-signatory, does it do anything to us? Of course the <a
href="http://www.terradaily.com/2004/040930164209.dm9a5r58.html">Europeans</a>
are not happy with us, and this could do much to gather their support for Russia
in other arenas (particularly in WTO negotiations, as most of the articles above
note). 

Surprisingly little news of this on the blog front - yet. If any readers can
point to go, "non-canned" analysis of the prospects for ratification, then
please drop a comment here and let the rest of us know.
