---
title: The Forest at the Intersection of Ecology and Economics
date: 2004-09-22
slug: the_forest_at_the_intersection_of_ecology_and_economics
tags:
- discourse
- nature
---

I've been reading a great deal about ecology and conservation biology lately,
and thus found the article [Ecolonomics: Valuing
Forests](http://windsofchange.net/archives/005533.php) quite timely. Of course it is an intriguing article whether or not
one has been reading up on the subject, and I recommend it even more to those
who _haven't_ been doing so.

<!-- truncate -->

An aside: though it was staring me in the face, it took me a few moments to
decompose "ecolonomics" into "ecology" + "economics." So perhaps this message
will save you one of those moments.

The gist of the article is: how do we put a reasonable monetary value on a
forest system (for example) in order to properly weigh its economic benefits in
comparison with alternate uses for its resources? More specifically, the article
presumes that we are already putting a value to the forest's products (primarily
wood) and goes on to look at the services provided by that forest, with several
lucid examples. The whole is inspired by the book [Eco-Economy: Building an
Economy for the Earth](http://earth-policy.org/Books/Eco/index.htm).

The article closes on a strong point of considering the free market system
(after all, this about modern neoliberal economics). My version of this point:
It has been said that the free market works best when the consumer is fully
informed about a product in question. In the case of today's industry, we are
often left without full knowledge of the ramifications of unsustainable
practices; that is, we are not fully informed. Thus the lack of proper valuation
of natural resources means that we have a "free market" system that is heavily
skewed toward the sellers and to the disadvantage of the buyers.
