---
layout: page
title: Call for International Grassroots Spirituality
date: 2004-10-19
basename: call_for_international_grassroots_spirituality
tags:
- discourse
- justice
---

I have traditionally been an apologist for the United Nations, but lately I have
been forced to question my unconditional support. While the U.N.'s mission is
entirely laudable, its execution &mdash; particularly in regards to peacekeeping
&mdash; seems to fall short. We have seen U.N. failures in Korea, Vietnam, the
former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, and more. What has brought this about? Is the whole
system flawed? Who is more to blame &mdash; the bureaucracy or the nations that
are "united"? Perhaps these are not the questions to ask. Instead, I suggest
that we ask &mdash; where is the grassroots appeal, and where is the recognition
of human spirituality?

<!--more-->

I do not pretend to know the answer to the former questions. But they are
questions that the apologists amongst us must ask. At the same time, the
black-helicopter-paranoid, isolationists, and general U.N.-bashers in our midst
should recognize the many good works of this body - particularly through the
UNHCR, UNICEF, and UNESCO, as well as the establishment of various international
laws that have real effects, everyday (cf Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species). While the world was (is?) slower to react on Darfur than
many of us would like, the situation would be far worse today if it weren't for
UNHCR's early and consistent work in the region, bringing food, medicine, and
shelter to hundreds of thousands who would not otherwise have access to them.

Because of work like this, I will continue to support the U.N. even if it turns
out that Kofi Annan's son illegally benefited from Iraqi oil sales, even if Kofi
Annan himself turns out to be blind in the face of French, Russian, and Chinese
collusion with Saddam Hussein, even if the Security Council is impotent in the
Israel-Palestine situation.

Nevertheless, I realize that the system is not a panacea and that it may be that
both the people/nations in the system and the system itself are flawed. This
extends beyond the U.N. to most of our international bodies, such as the World
Trade Organization and the World Bank. I will make the bold claim that there are
two essential and related aspects missing from the current attempts at creating
international order - grassroots appeal and recognition of the inherent
spirituality of mankind.

Consider the difficulty any human organization faces in achieving "buy in" for a
new idea. Whether we speak of a business large or small, a government national
or local, or any other formal or informal grouping of people, they tend toward
the status quo unless they buy in to a proposed change. Buy in comes from a real
grasp of the situation "on the ground," from a careful analysis presented in an
intelligible fashion to the agents of change. That is not something governments
are particularly good at achieving. Rather, that is the realm of grassroots
involvement and activism.

With regards to spirituality, you can dismiss it as an evolutionary-oddity whose
time has passed or as the _summum bonum_ of reality. Individual opinion about the
matter aside, the great mass of people, even within the United States, still
regard spirituality in some form as a meaningful aspect of their lives. Yet
almost all international peace and justice work seems to focus purely on
material aspects of life without recognizing essential psycho-spiritual
dimensions.

Appeals to spirituality, to the best in man's nature and core beliefs, can
result in real change. Look at the change that Christian faith brought to our
current President. Approve of him or not, it is hard not recognize that his
faith was responsible for overcoming the addictions of his youth. At the same
time, faith can be and is used to justify intolerance, harassment, and even
violence. These problems will not be solved by a purely secular approach. The
waters of science cannot quench the fires of fundamentalism. Only faith in
itself can regulate fundamentalism.

Further, the two concepts of grassroots activism and appeals to faith can affect
powerful, positive changes in society even on a relatively short time span, as
evidenced by the mid-twentieth century Civil Rights movement in the United
States. International organizations would do well to study these areas and adopt
policies to promote their reinforcement. Indeed, there is some movement in this
direction: the establishment of the World Council of Religious Leaders as an
advisor to the U.N. and all nations in 2002, and the birth of the United
Religions Initiative (URI) in 2000.

Both bodies hold great promise for assisting in the process of advancing
civilization beyond our current violent and inequitable state. The URI in
particular holds within itself both an emphasis on a constructive meeting of
spiritual ideas as well as a movement for local and trans-national grassroots
activism. But it can only work with those who are open to the call for
interfaith cooperation &mdash; that is where the World Council can play a strong
role, encouraging religious leadership to guide their co-religionists toward a
more peaceful future.

Of course these are but two of the many inter-religious organizations that are
taking an active and increasingly important role in achieving the peace for
which the United Nations was developed. Each has a role to play; each can
contribute to the individual changes that may soon spill over into real social
change, and, in turn, into achievement of a more harmonious future. 

---

_This editorial was partially inspired by <a
href="http://windsofchange.net/archives/005747.php">If You See Blue Helmets,
Run</a>. Readers may be interested in a related piece from this blog, <a
href="/archive/2004/09/08/unity_the_mortar_of_world_peace/s">Unity - the Mortar
of World Peace</a>._
