---
layout: page
title: A Lion of Racial Reconciliation... Louis G. Gregory
date: 2011-02-15
basename: a_lion_of_racial_reconciliation
tags:
- discourse
- religion
- books
- inclusion
- Bahai
---

It was about three years ago, while attending a conference at Green Acre
Bah&aacute;'&iacute; School in Eliot, Maine, that I had the bounty of making a
sunrise pilgrimage to the burial site of Louis Gregory, Hand of the Cause of
Bah&aacute;'u'll&aacute;h. At the time I knew little about him &mdash; that he
was an early African-American adherent of the Bah&aacute;'&iacute; Faith, a
fantastic and tireless teacher, well-loved by 'Abdu'l-Bah&aacute;, and thanks to
the Master&#8217;s encouragement, one-half of perhaps the first black/white
Bah&aacute;'&iacute; marriage in the U.S.

<!--more-->

I paid my respects as the sun rose on a chilly November morning, illuminating
the lovely gravestone even as the Bah&aacute;'&iacute; teachings illuminated
Gregory&#8217;s visage. The skeptic in me knows not whether my prayers and
reflections that morning had any effect beyond providing a reference point for a
lasting sense of serenity &mdash; and yet my spirit cares not. Moved as I was,
it makes no difference whether the invocation of divine grace dissipated in
synapses or radiated into the Eternal.

Soon after returning I knew that I must learn more about this lion of racial
reconciliation. At last, this past Autumn I began reading _To Move the World:
Louis G. Gregory and the Advancement of Racial Unity in America_. Though
interrupted by my first true Pilgrimage, I returned from time to time to finish.
Being both a biography and a history, this book presents remarkable insights on
the man and the mission, shedding light on the racial challenges, the many
crises faced, and victories won by the American Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s between
the period of around 1909 to 1951. The author&#8217;s research was meticulous,
with copious citations to published works and to letters housed in private
collections.

While ferrying other youth from the Kingdom Conference in Milwaukee to a
teaching project in Austin (2001), we stayed for a night in northwestern
Arkansas. The late night venture from southern Missouri into the Ozarks was
extremely taxing and, on the twisting two-lane highways, rather harrowing.
Despite the road weariness, a morning conversation with a local has stuck with
me ever since. He, who is white, remarked how the American Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s
in the 20s and 30s had blown it with respect to racial reconciliation.
'Abdu'l-Bah&aacute; and Shoghi Effendi both had challenged the American
believers to overcome their prejudices, welcoming and inviting all. But, in this
man&#8217;s opinion, the Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s had failed, and the whole world
was facing the consequences.

_To Move the World_ does not take such a harsh tone and dim outlook &mdash; but
it does make plain the real struggles to embrace the concept of "oneness of
humanity" and realize its deep implications. Although some steps were taken in
the Bah&aacute;'&iacute; communities, nationally and locally, the setbacks and
slow progress are so evident that it would be easy, and perhaps appropriate, to
interpret this as a history of failure. Nevertheless, the book makes clear that
Gregory persevered, and that the Advent of Divine Justice, among other letters
from the Guardian, did prompt real changes. The guidance from Haifa provided the
impetus and sustenance for the work of Gregory, and others on the various "race
unity" and teaching committees, to operate on those around them, driving
feedback cycles that led to more and more integrated communities and real love
and respect between black and white Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s.

Nearly sixty years have passed since Gregory&#8217;s death. The anecdotal
evidence suggests that substantial work remains to be done in the quest for
spiritual and material equality. I have been in gatherings dominated by whites
and a few dominated by blacks, but beyond large-scale meetings, I can think of
none in my own experience that were representative of a diverse and
well-integrated community. Indeed, the Universal House of Justice in its recent
guidance to the Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s of the World reminds us of the imperative
of moving beyond good intentions, actively striving to create true unity in our
midst. We would do well to study from the history of race unity efforts in
America, learning from the mistakes but also standing on the shoulder of its
giants &mdash; of whom none can raise us higher than Louis G. Gregory.

