---
title: Non-Discrimination in the Campus Club
date: 2012-03-24
tags:
- discourse
- inclusion
- religion
---

Vanderbilt University, a large private school in Tennessee, is enforcing rules
that require all student groups receiving on campus funds to open up membership
to anyone - including officer positions ([story
on NPR](https://www.npr.org/2012/03/22/149141095/vanderbilt-rule-rankles-faith-based-student-groups)). Naturally, this is of great concern to Faith-based organizations in
particular: one can easily imagine a group of atheists gate-crashing a meeting
and electing their own leader to be the President/Chair/Grand Poobah of the _
&lt;insert religion&gt; Association_.

<!-- truncate -->

Now, the aim of these rules is to prevent wholesale exclusion of a
classification of people from an organization, to whit a gay White man has been
elected to an officer position in an Asian association. If he is helping support
the continued existence and flourishing of elements of the many Asian cultures,
then who can find fault with that? But, with the right trolling, another
individual could turn such a group into, say, an anti-immigrant political
activist club - just by showing up in sufficient numbers. So the original
members would quit, move on, and take their cause up under another name.

The notion of judging and discriminating based on beliefs then, be they
religious, political, or whatever, becomes problematic. That is the inherent
nature of a [club](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Club). The inability
to do so calls into question the very notion of having an organization of
like-_minded_ individuals, such as a religious organization, working together on
campus. And yet, practically speaking, what prevents this from being a problem
anywhere else? Is it really all that bad?

Let's take the Bah&aacute;&iacute; Association at the University of Texas (UT).
Now, UT does not allow religious groups to have official sponsorship. We were
allowed to use campus facilities, but not any of the UT trademarks. We were not
allowed to have official sponsors. And if someone showed up presenting
viewpoints that were plainly antithetical to the Baha'i Faith, we would have
simply discussed the matter with the individual and reconvened for formal
business at another time and place, _possibly off-campus_.

In my five years at UT, there were individuals out on the West Mall who could
grow quite tiresome in their preaching (be they religious or not), but no one
was ever such a troll that they repeatedly learned about our meetings, showed
up, and dominated them. We really were not all that different than a group at
Vanderbilt today, and the problem took care of itself.

It is troublesome to think that the Bah&aacute;&iacute;s at that University, or
Christians, or Republicans, could be taken over and their good name subverted.
One might be able to argue that these rules impinge somehow on our rights of
speech, religion, and assembly (though the Bill of Rights does not govern a
private University's policies, as far as I know). But let us not rush to
judgment. The problem of discrimination is real and we must try out different
ways to counter it. And even if the trolls win: is it really so bad if an
exclusivist club is not allowed to receive on-campus support? Just take the
meeting elsewhere. better yet, find some real world affliction to address rather
than spending your energy complaining about your inability to divide one group
from another on campus.
