---
layout: page
title: Wetlands Conservation and Advocacy
date: 2012-11-04
basename: wetlands_conservation_and_advocacy
tags:
- discourse
- nature
---

This past week's terrible storm out East provides a reminder of the importance
of our ecological infrastructure; in particular, wetlands. The lessons that we
did not heed from Hurricane Katrina will perhaps take hold with Hurricane Sandy
impacting the nation's commercial heart: in addition to supporting relief
efforts now, it is important for us to consider long-term mitigation against the
impact of future large storms, which are likely to be more <a href=
"http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2012/10/31/1117091/how-does-climate-change-make-hurricanes-like-sandy-more-destructive/?mobile=nc">
powerful and more frequent</a> than in centuries past. Instead of, <a href=
"http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/04/nyregion/protecting-new-york-city-before-next-time.html?pagewanted=3&_r=0&hp">or
in addition to</a>, relying on massive levies, seawalls, and the like, we need
to support public and private endeavors to restore vital natural systems.

{: .center-block }
![egret](/images/IMG_0075.JPG){: .img-fluid .border .rounded }<br>
<small>White-morph Reddish Egret, doing the Reddish Egret dance, in a wetland on Texas's Mustang
Island</small>

<!--more-->

Wetlands are <a href="http://water.epa.gov/type/wetlands/index.cfm">nature's
defence</a> against storm surges, and they are her filters for clean water. They
provide crucial habitat for life from across the "kingdoms" &mdash; distinct
varieties of plants, funguses, invertebrates, mollusks, birds, mammals, and so
on. And this diversity is beautiful, from a purely aesthetic standpoint. Trails,
boardwalks, and observation decks can easily provide human access to appreciate
and meditate on the beauty of life, helping reverse the trend of <a href=
"http://www.education.com/topic/nature-deficit-disorder/">nature deficit
disorder</a>.

These natural systems are not just for the coasts; they are also vital to the
interior. Yesterday morning, participating in the [Trinity Bird Count](http://www.trinitybirdcount.com/), I toured the <a
href=
"http://www.trinityrivercorridor.com/flood-control/chain-wet-lands.html">lower
chain of wetlands</a> that was constructed along the Trinity River in the past
10 years, just southeast of downtown. Staff from the Army Corps of Engineers
explained to us how these wetlands, located near Interstate 45 and Loop 12,
would provide additional nitrogen/phosphorus filtration for effluent from a
water treatment plant (mitigating our impact on downstream residents). They will
help protect the nearby, historically minority, Joppa neighborhood from
flooding. Where these wetlands replace or prevent buildup of man-made
structures, or improve the ability for the surrounding land to sustain plant
life, they absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, and thus provide a means
for reducing the city's contribution toward global climate change. In this
particular case, these 123 acres of wetlands are joined by over 1,000 acres of
the "Great Trinity Forest", providing for substantial <a href=
"http://www.nrs.fs.fed.us/niacs/carbon/forests/carbon_sequestration/">carbon
sequestration</a>.

{: .center-block }
![cormorants flying](/images/IMG_0439.JPG){: .img-fluid .border .rounded}<br>
<small>Double-Crested Cormorants</small>

The City of Dallas is working on a recreation plan that will provide access and
trails through this greenspace, suitable for hikers, bird-watchers, and even
horseback riding (evidence of which can already be found!). Local residents tell
of coyote and bobcat, no doubt frequently hunting rabbits like the one I nearly
stepped on. That rabbit's cousins are probably happily munching away on a
neighbor's vegetable garden; surely the rabbit population is in need of natural
checks and balances in the form of predation. Our two-and-a-half hour tour
turned up forty-eight species of birds, including nine species of sparrows that
migrate from parts north, looking for quality fields like these for over
wintering. While everyday Rock Pigeons and House Sparrows are numerous around
Dallas, we saw none. But we did see a tremendous flock, estimated at around
1,000 individuals, of Double Crested Cormorants who have come down for the
season, feeding in these wetlands and our local lakes.

{: .center-block }
![downtown Dallas](/images/IMG_0448.JPG){: .img-fluid .border .rounded }<br>
<small>Downtown Dallas over Wetland Cell F</small>

Historically, our coastal areas and rivers like the Trinity contained
naturally-formed wetlands. These have been drained for agricultural, commercial,
and sometimes health, reasons. But the unintended consequences come back to
haunt us with increased flooding, loss of biodiversity, and further artificial
separation of "man" from nature. Local organizations dedicated to sustainable
living and stewardship, such as the new <a href=
"http://www.dallasinterfaith.org">Dallas Interfaith Power &amp; Light</a>, can
play a supportive role in mitigating against the unintended consequences of past
policies and economic activity. Reaching out beyond our narrow self interests,
we can express the group's mission of "love, justice, and care for creation" by
advocating for development projects that restore natural systems and protect
local neighborhoods, and in encouraging local citizens to responsibly enjoy
them.

{: .center-block }
![looking north](/images/IMG_0451.JPG){: .img-fluid .border .rounded }<br>
<small>Looking due north, across an old landfill and into the Great Trinity Forest</small>
