---
layout: page
title: 'Fracking: a Great Distraction from Renewables and Conservation'
date: 2012-11-11
basename: fracking_a_great_distraction_from_renewables_and_conservation
tags:
- discourse
- climate
---

{: .float-right }
![lighting tap water on fire](/images/Gasland_5Full.png)

[The Sky Is Pink](http://www.gaslandthemovie.com/), from the director
of _Gasland_, makes a potent argument that we need to resist ANY gas drilling,
but particularly fracking with its permanently toxic benzene, toluene, etc. In
middle school I recall writing a paper for science class, about sources of
groundwater pollution in Texas. Improperly-capped oil and gas wells were a major
source. I was able to find the scientific research there in my middle school and
public libraries. This short film reminds us that a significant increase in the
number of wells translates to a significant increase in the number of leaking
wells that pollute our water supplies.

<!--more-->

The United States' levels of greenhouse gas emissions have gone down
dramatically, thanks to fracking (<a href=
"http://news.discovery.com/earth/co2-pollution-down-to-1992-levels-in-the-us-120821.html">Discovery
News</a>). Fracking produces cheap natural gas, and thereby supplants coal. The
coal industry executives that are lashing out at President Obama in recent days
are blaming him for their woes, when the root causes are competition and a poor
track record in basic mine safety. But, as both _The Sky is Pink_ and this
_Discovery_ article point out, the low cost of natural gas also undermines the
market for further development of renewable energy sources.

Furthermore, because the environmental / health costs of fossil fuel use are so
completely "externalized" (paid by no one, the government, or individuals), the
cost of natural gas can be seen as artificially low. Basic economics suggests
that artificially low prices induce greater use of a product. But this is a
product whose use needs to be reduced significantly. We need to turn not only to
alternatives, but more importantly to further reduction in use of energy and
increase in transmission efficiency so that we simply do not need to develop an
ever-increasing number of wells, turbines, and fields of solar arrays.

The film talks about the strategy of distracting the public with misleading
science, so that they think there is a debate going on about the health-effects
of natural gas drilling (or tobacco, or climate change). Although it might not
be an explicit part of the strategy, perhaps we are also becoming too mired in a
debate about fracking when we should be focusing our human resources on
eliminating the need for more fossil fuels altogether.

So &mdash; what have you done to reduce your energy consumption this week? Or
decided not to do? I turned off my A/C on Thursday and let my office heat up to
81 deg F, with a fan sitting in the open window. Oh, and I walked the 1.5 miles
to my polling place on Tuesday! But lest you think I'm being overly
self-congratulatory: I got lucky. Most other weeks would not have had such data
points, meager though they are.
