---
layout: page
title: Destruction of Baha'i Holy Sites
date: 2004-08-03
basename: destruction_of_bahai_holy_sites
tags:
- religion
- Baha'i
---

The persecution of the Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s of Iran continues: recent months
have seen the wanton destruction of two holy sites in Iran. In April, it was
learned that the grave of Qudd&uacute;s had been secretly razed over a period of
several nights, despite local protests against the government's actions. This
weekend the sudden destruction of the house of M&iacute;rz&aacute;
Buzurg-i-N&uacute;r&iacute; in Tehran was brought to light. It is unknown (to
me) how many holy places are left in Iran and Iraq; these were undoubtedly two
of the most historical.

<!--more-->

Qudd&uacute;s ("The Most Holy"), whose given name was Mulla Muhammad-'Al&iacute;
B&aacute;fur&uacute;shi, was also called "El B&aacute;b'u'l-B&aacute;b" ("Gate
of the Gate"), the gateway to the imprisoned Prophet known to history as the
B&aacute;b. He was the B&aacute;b's chief disciple, helping to spread the young
Prophet's teachings and explicate His laws. He was slain most cruelly by the mob
of B&aacute;rfur&uacute;sh, the 19<sup>th</sup> century Persian equivalent of a
brutal lynching. Thanks to the efforts of a sympathetic clergyman, the ruin of
his body was buried at an old Madrasa (school or college). It was this building
that was <a href="http://www.bahaiworldnews.org/story.cfm?storyid=293">torn
down</a>, after standing as a shrine to this holy soul for over 150 years.

To a Christian, this would be akin to the sack and pillage of the tomb of the
Apostle Peter. The other destruction I speak of requires no such analogy: for it
is of the house of Bah&aacute;'u'll&aacute;h's father.

M&iacute;rz&aacute; Buzurg was of the provincial aristocracy and had been a
close adviser (_vaz&iacute;r_) to the Shah in the first half of the 1800's (a
post said to have been offered to Bah&aacute;'u'll&aacute; Himself after His
father's death). M&iacute;rz&aacute; Buzurg was a beloved figure both in the
King's court and amongst his countrymen, and his house had stood amongst
non-Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s as a reminder of Persia's great past and Islamic
tradition (the latter being a striking irony of course). But in one fell swoop,
the authorities in Tehran brought its walls down. Unfortunately I can find no
English-language source to confirm the details.

All I can hope is that these events will only strengthen the collective resolve
of the hundreds-of-thousands of Bah&aacute;'&iacute;s still living under the
shadow of persecution in Iran. I would hope for the world's attention, but that
would be a vain hope indeed.
