---
layout: page
title: The Cure
date: 2004-06-29
basename: the_cure
tags:
- music
---

_The Cure_ is the name of <a href="http://www.thecure.com" title="The Cure :: Official Site">The Cure</a>'s
latest international mega-release. Debuting today and breaking all records
(surely some record, maybe best opening day for a 25+ year old alternative
college band from southern England?). Well, I suppose that all remains to be
seen. Anyway, I am now happily in possession of this newest album from my
favorite band in the whole wide world.  

And it is good.

Lyrically, Robert doesn't seem to cover any new ground. But apart from singing
about being over the hill, he's not been able to do much new in the last decade
plus. And that's okay with me. Its not like he can <a
href="http://www.morrisseymusic.com/" title="The official site of
Morrissey">riff on politics</a> and stir up the fanbase. He writes poetry about
love, and it still sounds good in my ears.

Now, there are plenty of <a
href="http://www.metacritic.com/music/artists/cure/cure/" title="Metacritic's
collection of reviews; apparently the 81 average is quite good.">reviews on
the web</a>, and I don't want to bore you by repeating what they have to say.
Go read them if you're inclined. And let me add the following: it never lags.
It never pulls away, drifting into pop oblivion. In fact it is extremely
_present_ thanks to the production style. The psychedelic guitars are in good
use, the keyboards are subdued, and the percussion is front and center. My
main complaint about _Bloodflowers _was that it never rocked, even the
purposefully-bombastic Watching Me Fall was at pretty much the same pace as
the rest of the album. Not to say this album has a fast beat, but it does
rock.  

It sounds live. Very reminiscent of the the _Trilogy_ DVD, which performances I
rate very highly. Yes, I'm a junkie, but my wife's not quite a Smith and company
junkie, and she's pretty impressed by it too (Trilogy, that is). By the way, I
just restarted the record after my first complete listen through. 

This is going to get a lot of listening from me. Usually if I say that a new
piece by an old band might actually broaden its audience, I don't necessarily
mean that as a good thing. But there is nothing remotely shlocky or shmaltzy
here. And despite sharing a producer, it doesn't sound like Limp Bizkit. And I
think it will attract a few new souls.  

This review is more worthy of _Wild Mood Swings_ than _The Cure_. But I'm trying
to have a conversation here, so I'm okay with that. Its not like I'm writing up
policies and procedures at work or getting paid by _Rolling Stone_. Overall I
would say that old-school Cure fans who can get past 1983 should like this. It
has elements of 1983 (_Pornography_, that is), and reminds me of certain tracks
from _Kiss Me_ and _Wish_ most particularly, especially the b-sides from the
latter. Somewhere in the middle was a track whose attitude, though not
necessarily atmosphere, strongly evoked live recordings of _Disintegration's_
Prayers for Rain. So go out and buy it already! $10 at Best Buy.
