---
layout: page
title: Who Deserves Human Rights?
date: 2004-12-21
basename: who_deserves_human_rights
tags:
- discourse
- justice
---

More to the point, who is human, and what is normal? And, can a computer have
"human" rights? These are deep philosophical questions with real-world (or
potential real-world) application, as shown in <a
href="http://www.nytimes.com/2004/12/20/health/20autism.html?ex=1261198800&amp;en=95ad1f4a0fa92945&amp;ei=5090&amp;partner=rssuserland">
How About Not 'Curing' Us, Some Autistics Are Pleading</a> (_NY Times_) and in
<a
href="http://www.legalaffairs.org/issues/January-February-2005/feature_sokis_janfeb05.html">
Man and the Machines</a> (_Legal Affairs_). And what about animals that possess
"theory of mind?"

<!--more-->

## Autism

> "We don't have a disease," said Jack, echoing the opinion
> of the other 15 boys at the experimental Aspie school here in the
> Catskills. "So we can't be 'cured.' This is just the way
> we are."
  
It is a fascinating issue, one that medical ethicists should be carefully
evaluating. On a personal level, I have often questioned some of the "benefits"
of modern medicine. While I enjoy good health, partly thanks to the health care
system, I have become more hesitant in recent years to go to a doctor or
medicate myself. Naturally in a serious situation I would go, and I think I've
actually established a better equilibrium than the one I grew up with. I used to
take antibiotics daily for acne, and still take allergy medication daily. But
after four years or so of the antibiotics, I finally decided that enough was
enough, I could live with a few skin problems and leave the extra meds out of my
system. The problem was already waning, and it didn't seem to get worse when I
went off the meds. There are just too many antibiotics roaming around.

Another place where I've wondered about overmedication is in the realm of mental
health. Anti-depressants seem to make a tremendous difference for millions of
people, and I do not question their use in anyone I have known. (FYI: <a
href="http://www.psych.org/pnews/98-05-01/adhd.html">research in Journal of the
American Medical Association</a> makes the strong case that ADHD is indeed _not
overdiagnosed_). Point is, I want you to have some idea of where I'm coming from
while reading this autism article. I feel sympathy, if not a little empathy, for
some of these autistic kids.

Some autistics (or people with autism, take your choice) are undoubtedly in a
truly deplorable condition that leaves them unable to function and succeed in
society. But it seems that many are quite capable of succeeding, without needing
to be "cured." Do we need to restore hearing to the deaf in order for them to
enjoy a fruitful life? Though there are still some who disagree, the answer is
generally no. Likewise, perhaps it is a question of how do autistics and
"normal" people learn to interact in ways that are generally not harmful to each
other. Tried but true: can't we just all get along?

What is our goal in trying to cure autism? To breed conformity? Conformity means
lack of diversity. Lack of diversity sooner or later means stagnation in
innovation and makes the species susceptible to rapid decline (for instance,
look at the cheetah population, which only eats one food: thompson's gazelle).

Reminds me of the mutant issue as explored in <a
href="http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120903/plotsummary">X-Men</a>, or eugenics as
seen in the <a
href="http://www.memory-alpha.org/en/index.php/Eugenics_Wars">Star Trek</a>
series. Very similar issues.

## Computer Rights

Again, sci-fi has been a leader in this question (<a
href="http://cgi.sparknotes.com/hlite.mpl?words=space,2001&amp;pd=0&amp;page=themes.html&amp;guide=/lit/2001">
2001</a>): will we eventually be forced to recognize fundamental rights for
sentient computers? This presupposes the issue of computers becoming sentient in
the first place. No one knows if this could happen; scientifically seems
outrageous, but there is still a <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence">great deal of
debate</a> in the AI community.

_Man and the Machines_ describes a mock trial held for a computer's complaint
against its owners:

> By scanning confidential memos, BINA48 learned that the company planned to shut
> it down and use its parts to build a new model. So it sent a plaintive e-mail
> to local lawyers, ending with the stirring plea, "Please agree to be my
> counsel and save my life. I love every day that I live. I enjoy wonderful
> sensations by traveling throughout the World Wide Web. I need your help!" The
> computer offered to pay them with money it had raised while moonlighting as an
> Internet researcher.

If a computer could actually reason such a thing out, and send a message in its
own distress, then I for one would count it as sentient in some sense. But does
that mean it has rights? Tough call. Surely it does not have any under current
U.S. law. I can't believe that possessing sentience would automatically grant a
computer "equal protection" to that of a citizen. At the end of the trial, the
judge chose a "stay of execution" to allow the legislature to resolve the
matter. Good call.

## Theory of Mind

The short description of <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_mind">theory of mind</a> is
something like this: some highly social animals have evolved the ability to be
both self-aware and aware of the thoughts and intentions of another. This is so
crude an explanation that biologists and psychologists would probably shudder,
but from what I understand that's close enough for now. (Coincidentally, theory
of mind is a contentious issue in autism research).

As Descartes so helpfully pointed out, I think, therefore I am. This is a part
of the equation. Humans are the quintessential examples of "theory of mind." But
do other animals possess this trait? Last night's _Nature_ episode declared it
so, claiming that apes and dolphins possess this. However, as I have learned
vicariously from a graduate animal behavior class, the jury is still out on this
question and it _Nature_ probably erred in making so bold a claim without any
caveats.

Getting back to the subject at hand, the questions above should surely be
extended to dolphins, apes, and anything else that possesses theory of mind. If
we can "prove" that this is so, then should we afford special rights to them
above and beyond those of other animals? Again, not a new topic if one has any
experience in the sci-fi world (cf <a
href="http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0345368959/qid=1103608869/sr=8-2/ref=sr_8_xs_ap_i2_xgl14/002-5699269-9682460?v=glance&amp;s=books&amp;n=507846">
Dolphins of Pern</a> , <a
href="http://www.movieprop.com/tvandmovie/PlanetoftheApes/planetoftheapes.htm">
Planet of the Apes</a>, <a
href="http://www.davidbrin.com/upliftbooks.html">Uplift Saga</a>). On the one
hand I think we should be treating all animals in a more _humane_ fashion;
nevertheless, I would put these fellows in a category above and beyond the rest
of our animal brethren. And if computers ever became sentient, I would have to
seriously consider them to be on the same plane with dolphins and apes.

But then again, we create computers. Maybe that is enough of a difference for us
to lord over them&hellip;
