---
title: 'Review: Down and Out'
date: 2011-10-08
slug: review_down_and_out
tags:
- books
---

_Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom_ by Cory Doctorow is what happens when a
classic geek extrapolates the cyberpunk future of a reputation-based economy
combined with the extrusion of an open source ethos into the management of
everyday affairs, tosses in immortality and lean project management, and sets it
all in the context of the semi-religious experience of Disney World.

<!-- truncate -->

A well-crafted amusement park ride of the Disney-variety leads you through a
thrilling story in a matter of minutes. The rider does not foresee the end of
the ride; when it arrives, the rider disembarks enthused and ready to jump back
into line. So it is with _Down and Out_; reading on the nook, where ignorance of
page count is natural,  I was stunned to look at the bottom of the screen and
realize I was at the end. What a ride it had been! I wanted to exclaim out loud
and rave about the book, but prudence restrained me from disturbing my fellow
airline passengers.

I've been to Disney World twice in conscious memory, and I think once when too
young to recall. Memories of Disney Land in the pre-K years also stir. That
frequency outs me as a privileged middle class American. To those who haven't
_experienced_ Disney, I've been unsuccessful in explaining the awe and joy I
still feel with respect to these parks. Explaining the mystique is like
explaining Star Wars; those who didn't grow up with it rarely grok it.
Doctorow's protagonist lets us in on one of the secrets: "The mark of a great
ride is that it gets better the second time around, as the detail and flourishes
start to impinge on your consciousness. The Mansion was full of little gimcracks
and sly nods that snuck into your experience on each successive ride." In
dialogue, in discourse, in contrasting experiences, the book makes a serious
contribution to understanding the mythos without destroying it

_Down and Out_ exudes love, joy, _reverence_ for the cultural icon and the
experience of Disney. And more importantly &mdash; for the condition of being human. The
characters are not paragons of virtue; they are human; no, they are
more-than-human: immortal, altered, freed of many of today's physical and social
constraints. But still they are human: petty, ambitious, caring, loving. For all
of Julius's failings, _I cared about him_, my fictional friend who has started
to realize the failings of the society he has embraced.

The book is only 208 pages, so give it a shot. See the present and the future in
a different light. Consider the implications of technology for humanity while
having a heck of a ride. Stands shoulder-to-shoulder with the best Sci Fi
around. Buy it, check it out at a library, or [download _Down and Out in the
Magic Kingdom_ for free](https://craphound.com/down/download/).
