---
layout: page
title: 'Robe of Light: The Persian Years of Supreme Prophet, Baha''u''lllah, by David
  Ruhe'
date: 2011-08-11
basename: robe_of_light_book_review
tags:
- books
- religion
- Bahai
---

{: .float-right }
![book cover](http://photo.goodreads.com/books/1178904270m/851669.jpg)

There are now many worthy biographies of Bah&aacute;'u'll&aacute;h available to
both the casual and serious student. Choosing from among them can be difficult;
thankfully, there is enough diversity of perspective, and a rich enough body of
source material, that one is enriched by reading several of them. Dr. David
Ruhe's _Robe of Light: The Persian Years of Supreme Prophet, Baha'u'lllah_ hones
in on M&iacute;rz&aacute; Husayn Al&iacute;'s life before He became the "Supreme
Manifestation" &mdash; as a youth, and particularly as one of the foremost
B&aacute;b&iacute;s. That he does so in a relatively objective and scientific
manner gives his work an additional refreshing lens through which to gaze on the
life and teachings of Bah&aacute;'u'll&aacute;h.

<!--more-->

The book's subject matter is meticulously researched, using both the "standard
sources" (_The Dawnbreakers_, _Bah&aacute;'u'll&aacute;h &mdash; King of Glory_,
the writings of the Guardian) and carefully employing other historical works
whose usefulness is granted, but large-scale accuracy sometimes doubted (for
instance, _Tarikh-i-Jadid_ in various editions, and minor works that are
difficult for those of us not in Haifa to come by). In many cases, Dr. Ruhe
gives a brief note explaining the differences between several works, and how he
came to choose a particular version of the story to present.

Personal experience and illustrations are used to excellent effect throughout
the book. The illustrations include numerous expert drawings as well as
black-and-white photographs. I believe the photographs were largely taken by the
author while on a pilgrimage of sorts through Iran well before the revolution.
That tour of the country allows Dr. Ruhe to verbally paint the picture of the
land that Bah&aacute;'u'll&aacute;h loved in His youth, traveling from hamlet to
hamlet, through steep mountain passes to Tehran or other regional cities in the
north. The reader who knows Iran merely as an adversary of the West will learn
to fall in love too with the majesty of this ancient homeland.

The first-hand knowledge garnered on his travels, and from his medical practice,
allows Dr. Ruhe on several occasions to explain some seemingly dubious
incidents. Without taking away from the heroism of Fort Shaykh Tabarsi, he tells
us about the conditions around it that were inhospitable to the attacking army.
As a medical doctor, he provides a reasonable explanation of how `Abdu'l
Khaliq-i-Isf&aacute;h&aacute;n&iacute; would have survived cutting his own
throat at Badasht, among other physician's notes.

This book was a joy to read. Dr. Ruhe's writing style is both refined and
accessible. His prose is influenced by the academic style, without becoming
mired in it. I would happily recommend it to any interested reader.
