---
layout: page
title: 'Review: Fundamental Modeling Concepts: Effective Communication of IT Systems'
date: '2010-12-17 21:22:18 -0600'
basename: review_fundamental_modeling_concepts
tags:
- tech
- architecture
- books
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<a
href="http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/4000313-fundamental-modeling-concepts"
style="float: left; padding-right: 20px"><img alt="Fundamental Modeling
Concepts: Effective Communication of IT Systems" border="0"
src="http://photo.goodreads.com/books/1266448029m/4000313.jpg" /></a><a
href="http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/4000313-fundamental-modeling-concepts">Fundamental
Modeling Concepts: Effective Communication of IT Systems</a> by <a
href="http://www.goodreads.com/author/show/1705367.Andreas_Knopfel">Andreas
Knopfel</a><br/>

My rating: <a href="http://www.goodreads.com/review/show/125379173">3 of 5 stars</a>

I have mixed feelings about this book. I've spent several years working
diligently on my flow-charting capabilities, using what scan resources I could
easily and quickly sift through on the Web and in the Visio Help, studying the
charts in all the comp-sci books I've read, and garnering feedback from my
colleagues. This book might have sped up that process significantly, and has
already had a positive impact on the communication efficacy of my charts. But, I
simply didn't  completely like the specific modeling "language" presented by the
authors.

<!--more-->

The flow charting is good, though I prefer having a few more block types to
illustrate the type of data being dealt with (i.e. documents vs databases). The
petri net was interesting but seemed like overkill -- when that level of detail
is needed, then it is probably time to move into UML. But my experience is
limited; I certainly don't know what others would find. And then there's the
entity diagramming (ERD), which was simply non-standard. Too much space was
dedicated to the fine details of the mechanics of these three viewpoints on
modeling, although I suppose that would be appropriate for  anyone trying to use
them as such and with little prior familiarity with flowchart or UML modeling.

The second half of the book moves beyond mechanics, and it is the more powerful
portion. For it is there that we dive in to application, learning how the
authors think and approach problems (most of which are in the domain of
computing, but allusions are made to uses for other industries). The second half
is also home to rare and valuable discussions of style, consistency, and simple
communication. I suspect I shall return to the second half many times in coming
years, looking for tips and reminders that will further improve the
architectural models I build.

Recommended for: system architecture modeling and business analysis. Not
recommended for: application design modeling. Even the authors agree that you
should stick with UML for design of particular applications.
