---
title: Racism Masquerading as Environmentalism
date: 2015-05-11
tags:
- discourse
- nature
- climate
- inclusion
---

<div class="image">
![photo from EarthDayTX booth](/img/dallasIPL_EDTX2015.jpg)
</div>

A disturbing thing happened at Earth Day Texas - racists and nativists showed up
masquerading as environmentalists. A tweet from the Southern Poverty Law Center
alerted me that [anti-immigrant groups with white supremacist
ties](http://www.splcenter.org/blog/2015/04/23/anti-immigrant-groups-flock-to-large-earth-day-event-in-texas-this-weekend)
would be out at Earth Day Texas. Seeing one of their (unmanned) booths was,
therefore, not a surprise. But being verbally accosted at my own booth was.

<!-- truncate -->

Toward the end of the last day of the festival (Apr 26), a gentleman approached
the Dallas Interfaith Power &amp; Light booth and engaged in conversation. From
the start it was apparent that he was coming with an agenda &mdash; but we
couldn&rsquo;t complain, since clearly we too had an agenda. He agreed that
anthropogenic climate change is a legitimate global problem. That&rsquo;s a fine
start. Then he asks: what do you think is the cause? Response: over consumption
of our resources, particularly in wealthy countries.

No &mdash; it&rsquo;s overpopulation, he says. He proceeds to lay out a brief
statement, and asks me to acknowledge that overpopulation is the root cause.
Response: no, I still hold that our human nature toward overconsumption is the
root cause, not population itself. &ldquo;THAT'S COGNITIVE DISSONANCE&rdquo; he
all but shouts. &ldquo;&hellip; those people&hellip; in Africa and Haiti&hellip;
all of your efforts are meaningless until we reduce their fertility
rates.&rdquo;

Yes, it was all about &ldquo;those people.&rdquo; Classic racist words &mdash;
and only the first in a string of overtly racist statements. Somewhere in there
were words about immigrants to the U.S. and their impact both on the
environment, and on our educational system (Chinese students "taking too many"
slots at our great American universities). My colleague, Cheryl Clark &mdash;
who had been valiantly trying to steer the conversation in a positive direction
&mdash; finally asked to end the conversation not long after the assertion that
&ldquo;blacks and Latinos don&rsquo;t like to use condoms&rdquo; (he
&ldquo;knows&rdquo; because he has &ldquo;asked them&rdquo;).

The argument that each American consumes far more than any individual in a
developing nation held no significance for him, because he claimed that taken as
a whole Africa is (or would be soon) out consuming Europe. The [Global Footprint
Network&rsquo;s](http://www.footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/) findings
disagree: Africa as a whole consumes 1.0 global hectare per person, compared to
4.1 in the EU. Despite having 38% of Africa&rsquo;s total population, that works
out to the EU consuming about 160% more than Africa, overall*.

Let&rsquo;s be fair: the syllogism that more people means more consumption means
more environmental problem is indisputable when discussing business as usual.
That is, under our dominant ways of life today, continued population growth must
inevitably lead to severe environmental problems. And we don&rsquo;t like to
talk about it, because too many people like this guy have historically cloaked
their racist views in pseudo/scientific assessments. Most environmentalists are
sensitive to the problems of eugenics, sterilization, and forced &ldquo;family
planning&rdquo; without real autonomy and personal choice. So we avoid the
subject.

My aim is not to vilify, but rather to expose. Long-time environmentalists are
likely thoroughly familiar with this debate. But younger Gen X&rsquo;ers like
me, and millennials, may not have run across this issue so much. We need to be
aware of this history. There are plenty of well-meaning people who can talk
seriously about over-population. Let us not deny the legitimate discussion.

What I really want to urge is that we turn this conversation around. Rather than
talk about how &ldquo;those people&rdquo; need to stop having so many children,
can we talk about the factors such as
[education](https://wayback.archive-it.org/22906/20240418081615/https://www.earth-policy.org/data_highlights/2011/highlights13),
[economics](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/04/130430161940.htm), and
functional governance (dead link removed; SF 2025), that just so happen to influence fertility
rates? And while we&rsquo;re doing so, can we talk about the massive over
consumption and materialism of the industrialized world &mdash; the issue that
is really at the root of climate change?

---

Footprint analysis based on [data from the Global Footprint
Network](https://www.footprintnetwork.org/). These data are &copy; Global
Footprint Network 2016.  National Footprint Accounts, 2016 Edition.  Licensed
and provided solely for non-commercial informational purposes.  Contact Global
Footprint Network at to obtain more information or obtain rights to use this
and/or other data.
