Finally, from a philosophical point of view: I learned to speak English - and
write code - by listening, identifying patterns, being corrected, and continuing
to practice. The LLM tools are essentially doing the same: just on far larger
and faster scale. If I were to read _The Lord of the Rings_, and the next week
write a sentence that is subconsciously similar to J.R.R. Tolkien, then that is
just a natural part of my training and development. It does not become a problem
(as I understand it) unless and until I am lifting sentences, names, or stories
from Tolkien. What grounds are there for objecting to a similar learning process
in machines?

-------

AI is evil. Not just when used for evil, but intrinsically evil. Electricity usage.

And so is my car. I except that, within certain parameters. Time to find the
parameters for AI acceptability.

--------



If that code is used for further
training, then you may get a downward spiral. Indeed, I wonder how many
AI-written "essays" are already on the Web, nearly unreadable to humans due to
the overabundance of advertisements, and now serving as fodder for future model
training.

No doubt this same argument was made by tailors, carpenters, and other
craftspeople of old when evaluating the use of new technology in their fields.
Purely anecdotally, other than achieving higher scales of production and more
consistency, I question whether these technologies actually improved the human
condition relative to loss of the dignity and creativity that come from
practicing those skilled trades. We stray now into the arena of lamenting the
risk of job loss and/or enfeeblement† of the work force, topics best left for
another day and a more qualified writer. (†from high skill to low skill labor).

----


## LLM Prompt

As a software engineering director building open source products, I have
prohibited my teams from using AI coding assistants due to concerns about
intellectual property and questions about the risks and real world effectiveness
of AI coding assistants. It is now time to allow and even encourage AI coding
assistants, with some guardrails.

Write an essay in the style of https://blog.safnet.com covering two topics:

1. Why the intellectual property argument is no longer valid.
2. Risks and effective ways for engineers to use AI to enhance their coding tasks.

Conclude that coding assistants are now allowed.
