---
layout: page
title: 'Advancement of Women: a Baha''i Perspective by Janet A. Khan and Peter J.
  Khan'
date: 2012-06-08
basename: advancement_of_women_a_bahai_perspective_by_janet_a_khan_and_peter_j_khan
tags:
- inclusion
- discourse
- books
- religion
---

{: .float-right }
![book cover](/images/advancementOfWomen.jpg)

In this scholarly work, Janet and Peter Khan present the theological grounding,
social context, historical action, and modern implementation of the concept of
"equality between the sexes" as found in the Bah&aacute;'&iacute; Faith. Well
researched and clearly written, the book has much to offer to those who, from
any background, wish to better understand the underpinnings and the implications
of this critical spiritual principle.

<!--more-->

The authors begin with a brief introduction to the religion, followed by an
attempt to define equality and an exploration of the role of family. Within
these chapters, the Khans acknowledge the impact of inequality, as well as the
challenges and critiques faced by those who propose to work for it. They
continue by stating in clear terms the mutual and distinct expectations for
women and men within Bah&aacute;'&iacute; religious law.

Not content with mere words, the next chapters explore how the leading figures
within the religion have delivered on the promise of equality. They show the
deeds and exhortations of the Prophet-Founder, Bah&aacute;'u'll&aacute;h; his
son, &lsquo;Abdu'l-Bah&aacute;; Shoghi Effendi, the Guardian; and the Universal
House of Justice. These chapters are illustrated by passages showing the
personal touch and active engagement of each of these "heads of the Faith." In
closing, the Khans move from mere explication to active encouragement. They
advocate for the tangible application of this principle in each individual's
life, in the dynamics of family, and in the community interactions of all
societies.

The Khans have done well in preventing the book from being laden with religious
and feminist jargon. Terms are clearly explained when introduced, and a glossary
is provided to help readers overcome any unfamiliarity with key figures,
institutions, and terms within the Bah&aacute;'&iacute; Faith. All quotations
are fully attributed in the end notes, thus the pages are not cluttered with
footnotes. In addition, a bibliography of the Bah&aacute;'&iacute; literature is
included to give proper credit to all those works that contributed to the
genesis of this one.

The topic remains a timely one. Although much progress has been made toward the
goal of the practical realization of sex equality, just as with race, the
results are uneven and sporadic. I recommend _Advancement of Women_ to anyone
wishing to better understand the Bah&aacute;'&iacute; Faith, and even more so to
those who seek a critical, action-oriented, and yet deeply spiritual assessment
of the role of women in society.

{: .text-center }
\***

Review of <a
href="http://www.bahaibookstore.com/productdetails.cfm?PC=7347">Advancement of
Women: A Bah&aacute;'&iacute; Perspective</a>, by Janet A. Khan and Peter J.
Khan. Published in 2003 by <a
href="http://www.bahaibookstore.com/">Bah&aacute;'&iacute; Publishing</a>, 415
Linden Ave, Wilmette, IL 60091. No goods or services were received in return for
this review.
